README.md, before:

# 🔥 California Wildfire Risk Prediction Platform

[![Python 3.9+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.9+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Status: In Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-in%20development-orange.svg)]()

> A production-ready machine learning platform that predicts wildfire risk for any location in California based on weather patterns, vegetation conditions, topography, and historical fire data.

## 🎯 Project Overview

California faces increasing wildfire threats due to climate change, with devastating consequences for communities, ecosystems, and infrastructure. This platform leverages machine learning and real-time data to predict wildfire risk 7-30 days in advance, enabling:

- **Early warning systems** for fire departments and emergency services
- **Risk assessment** for insurance companies and property developers  
- **Public safety tools** for California residents
- **Resource allocation optimization** for CAL FIRE

## ✨ Key Features

- **Predictive ML Models**: Random Forest and XGBoost models trained on 20+ years of historical fire data
- **Real-Time Predictions**: REST API serving wildfire risk scores for any California location
- **Interactive Map**: Streamlit dashboard displaying color-coded risk zones across California
- **Cloud Deployment**: Production ML pipeline deployed on AWS SageMaker
- **MLOps Pipeline**: Experiment tracking with MLflow, containerization with Docker, CI/CD with GitHub Actions
- **Geospatial Analysis**: Advanced feature engineering using NASA satellite data, NOAA weather, and USGS topography

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

### **Data & ML**

- **Languages**: Python 3.9+, SQL
- **ML Libraries**: Scikit-Learn, XGBoost, TensorFlow, PyTorch
- **Data Processing**: Pandas, NumPy, GeoPandas, Rasterio
- **Geospatial**: Folium, Shapely, PostGIS

### **MLOps & Deployment**

- **Cloud Platform**: AWS (SageMaker, S3, Lambda)
- **ML Tracking**: MLflow, DVC
- **API Framework**: FastAPI
- **Frontend**: Streamlit
- **Containerization**: Docker, Docker Compose
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with PostGIS

### **Visualization**

- Matplotlib, Seaborn, Plotly

## 📊 Data Sources

This project integrates multiple public datasets:

- **Historical Fires**: [CAL FIRE](https://frap.fire.ca.gov/) - Fire perimeters and incidents (2000-2024)
- **Weather Data**: [NOAA API](https://www.weather.gov/documentation/services-web-api) - Temperature, humidity, wind, precipitation
- **Vegetation**: [NASA MODIS](https://earthdata.nasa.gov/) - Vegetation indices (NDVI)
- **Topography**: [USGS](https://www.usgs.gov/) - Elevation, slope, terrain data

All data sources are publicly available and free to access.

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.9 or higher
- Git
- AWS account (for deployment phase)
- 10GB+ free disk space (for datasets)

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ftavafi/california-wildfire-risk-prediction-platform.git
cd california-wildfire-risk-prediction-platform

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Quick Start

```bash
# Download initial datasets (Coming in Phase 1)
python scripts/download_data.py

# Run exploratory data analysis (Coming in Phase 1)
jupyter notebook notebooks/01_data_exploration.ipynb

# Train model (Coming in Phase 3)
python scripts/train_model.py

# Start API server (Coming in Phase 4)
uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload

# Launch Streamlit dashboard (Coming in Phase 6)
streamlit run streamlit_app/app.py
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
california-wildfire-risk-prediction-platform/
│
├── data/                          # Data storage (gitignored)
│   ├── raw/                       # Original datasets
│   ├── processed/                 # Cleaned data
│   ├── features/                  # Engineered features
│   └── predictions/               # Model outputs
│
├── notebooks/                     # Jupyter notebooks for analysis
│   ├── 01_data_exploration.ipynb
│   ├── 02_fire_analysis.ipynb
│   └── ...
│
├── src/                           # Source code
│   ├── data/                      # Data loading and processing
│   ├── features/                  # Feature engineering
│   ├── models/                    # Model training and evaluation
│   ├── api/                       # FastAPI application
│   ├── deployment/                # AWS SageMaker deployment
│   └── utils/                     # Utility functions
│
├── streamlit_app/                 # Web application
│   ├── app.py                     # Main Streamlit app
│   └── components/                # UI components
│
├── tests/                         # Unit and integration tests
├── scripts/                       # Utility scripts
├── docs/                          # Documentation
│
├── requirements.txt               # Python dependencies
├── Dockerfile                     # Container configuration
└── README.md                      # This file
```

## 🎯 Project Roadmap

### Phase 0: Setup ✅ (In Progress)

- [x] Project structure initialization
- [x] Git repository setup
- [ ] Documentation framework

### Phase 1: Data Collection & Exploration (Planned)

- [ ] Download historical fire data
- [ ] Collect weather and climate data
- [ ] Exploratory data analysis
- [ ] Data quality assessment

### Phase 2: Feature Engineering (Planned)

- [ ] Temporal features (seasonality, trends)
- [ ] Weather features (temperature, humidity, wind)
- [ ] Vegetation features (NDVI, land cover)
- [ ] Spatial features (elevation, distance metrics)

### Phase 3: Model Development (Planned)

- [ ] Baseline model creation
- [ ] Advanced model training (Random Forest, XGBoost)
- [ ] Hyperparameter tuning
- [ ] Model evaluation and selection

### Phase 4: API Development (Planned)

- [ ] FastAPI REST endpoints
- [ ] Input validation
- [ ] Error handling

### Phase 5: AWS Deployment (Planned)

- [ ] SageMaker model deployment
- [ ] Cloud endpoint configuration
- [ ] Performance monitoring

### Phase 6: Frontend Development (Planned)

- [ ] Interactive California map
- [ ] Location search functionality
- [ ] Risk visualization dashboard

### Phase 7: MLOps (Planned)

- [ ] Docker containerization
- [ ] CI/CD pipeline setup
- [ ] Automated testing

### Phase 8: Documentation & Launch (Planned)

- [ ] Comprehensive documentation
- [ ] Demo video creation
- [ ] Public release

## 📈 Expected Results

**Target Model Performance:**

- Accuracy: > 85%
- Precision: > 70%
- Recall: > 80%
- ROC-AUC: > 0.85
- API Latency: < 500ms

## 🤝 Contributing

This is currently a portfolio project in active development. Contributions, suggestions, and feedback are welcome!

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👤 Author

**Tara Tavafi**

- Email: <f.tavafi@gmail.com>
- LinkedIn: [linkedin.com/in/taratavafi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/taratavafi)
- GitHub: [@ftavafi](https://github.com/ftavafi)
- Location: Los Angeles, California

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- CAL FIRE for providing comprehensive fire history data
- NOAA for weather and climate data access
- NASA for satellite imagery and vegetation indices
- USGS for topography and terrain data
- The open-source community for excellent ML tools and frameworks

## 📞 Contact

For questions, collaborations, or opportunities, please reach out via:

- Email: <f.tavafi@gmail.com>
- LinkedIn: [https://www.linkedin.com/in/taratavafi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/taratavafi)

---

**⚠️ Disclaimer**: This project is for educational and research purposes. Wildfire risk predictions should not be used as the sole basis for emergency decisions. Always follow official guidance from CAL FIRE and local authorities.

---

*Last Updated: October 2025*

Commit message:

docs: update personal story with accurate details from January 2025 Hollywood Hills fire

README.md, after:

# 🔥 California Wildfire Risk Prediction Platform

[![Python 3.9+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.9+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Status: In Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-in%20development-orange.svg)]()

> A production-ready machine learning platform that predicts wildfire risk for any location in California based on weather patterns, vegetation conditions, topography, and historical fire data.

## 🎯 Project Overview

**Personal Motivation**: In January 2025, I was living in West Hollywood when the wildfire broke out in the Hollywood Hills. Half of my building received evacuation orders, and my family and I packed our car with essentials, ready to flee at any moment. It was terrifying—watching neighbors scrambling with whatever they could carry, children crying, elderly residents needing help to evacuate, not knowing if any of us would have homes to return to. The fire eventually damaged and destroyed several homes in the area, displacing families and even impacting major events like the Oscar nominations.

As a data scientist standing there with our car packed, I kept thinking: "We have all this data—weather patterns, historical fires, satellite imagery—why can't we predict this better? Why are we always reacting instead of preparing?" That experience drove me to build this platform. The idea is simple but critical: if communities had reliable 7-30 day wildfire risk predictions, families could prepare their properties, secure important documents, coordinate with vulnerable neighbors, and evacuate safely—not in panic, but with a plan.

California faces increasing wildfire threats due to climate change, with devastating consequences for communities, ecosystems, and infrastructure. This platform leverages machine learning and real-time data to predict wildfire risk 7-30 days in advance, enabling:

- **Early warning systems** for fire departments and emergency services
- **Risk assessment** for insurance companies and property developers  
- **Public safety tools** for California residents
- **Resource allocation optimization** for CAL FIRE

## ✨ Key Features

- **Predictive ML Models**: Random Forest and XGBoost models trained on 20+ years of historical fire data
- **Real-Time Predictions**: REST API serving wildfire risk scores for any California location
- **Interactive Map**: Streamlit dashboard displaying color-coded risk zones across California
- **Cloud Deployment**: Production ML pipeline deployed on AWS SageMaker
- **MLOps Pipeline**: Experiment tracking with MLflow, containerization with Docker, CI/CD with GitHub Actions
- **Geospatial Analysis**: Advanced feature engineering using NASA satellite data, NOAA weather, and USGS topography

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

### **Data & ML**

- **Languages**: Python 3.9+, SQL
- **ML Libraries**: Scikit-Learn, XGBoost, TensorFlow, PyTorch
- **Data Processing**: Pandas, NumPy, GeoPandas, Rasterio
- **Geospatial**: Folium, Shapely, PostGIS

### **MLOps & Deployment**

- **Cloud Platform**: AWS (SageMaker, S3, Lambda)
- **ML Tracking**: MLflow, DVC
- **API Framework**: FastAPI
- **Frontend**: Streamlit
- **Containerization**: Docker, Docker Compose
- **CI/CD**: GitHub Actions
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with PostGIS

### **Visualization**

- Matplotlib, Seaborn, Plotly

## 📊 Data Sources

This project integrates multiple public datasets:

- **Historical Fires**: [CAL FIRE](https://frap.fire.ca.gov/) - Fire perimeters and incidents (2000-2024)
- **Weather Data**: [NOAA API](https://www.weather.gov/documentation/services-web-api) - Temperature, humidity, wind, precipitation
- **Vegetation**: [NASA MODIS](https://earthdata.nasa.gov/) - Vegetation indices (NDVI)
- **Topography**: [USGS](https://www.usgs.gov/) - Elevation, slope, terrain data

All data sources are publicly available and free to access.

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.9 or higher
- Git
- AWS account (for deployment phase)
- 10GB+ free disk space (for datasets)

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/ftavafi/california-wildfire-risk-prediction-platform.git
cd california-wildfire-risk-prediction-platform

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Quick Start

```bash
# Download initial datasets (Coming in Phase 1)
python scripts/download_data.py

# Run exploratory data analysis (Coming in Phase 1)
jupyter notebook notebooks/01_data_exploration.ipynb

# Train model (Coming in Phase 3)
python scripts/train_model.py

# Start API server (Coming in Phase 4)
uvicorn src.api.main:app --reload

# Launch Streamlit dashboard (Coming in Phase 6)
streamlit run streamlit_app/app.py
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
california-wildfire-risk-prediction-platform/
│
├── data/                          # Data storage (gitignored)
│   ├── raw/                       # Original datasets
│   ├── processed/                 # Cleaned data
│   ├── features/                  # Engineered features
│   └── predictions/               # Model outputs
│
├── notebooks/                     # Jupyter notebooks for analysis
│   ├── 01_data_exploration.ipynb
│   ├── 02_fire_analysis.ipynb
│   └── ...
│
├── src/                           # Source code
│   ├── data/                      # Data loading and processing
│   ├── features/                  # Feature engineering
│   ├── models/                    # Model training and evaluation
│   ├── api/                       # FastAPI application
│   ├── deployment/                # AWS SageMaker deployment
│   └── utils/                     # Utility functions
│
├── streamlit_app/                 # Web application
│   ├── app.py                     # Main Streamlit app
│   └── components/                # UI components
│
├── tests/                         # Unit and integration tests
├── scripts/                       # Utility scripts
├── docs/                          # Documentation
│
├── requirements.txt               # Python dependencies
├── Dockerfile                     # Container configuration
└── README.md                      # This file
```

## 🎯 Project Roadmap

### Phase 0: Setup ✅ (In Progress)

- [x] Project structure initialization
- [x] Git repository setup
- [ ] Documentation framework

### Phase 1: Data Collection & Exploration (Planned)

- [ ] Download historical fire data
- [ ] Collect weather and climate data
- [ ] Exploratory data analysis
- [ ] Data quality assessment

### Phase 2: Feature Engineering (Planned)

- [ ] Temporal features (seasonality, trends)
- [ ] Weather features (temperature, humidity, wind)
- [ ] Vegetation features (NDVI, land cover)
- [ ] Spatial features (elevation, distance metrics)

### Phase 3: Model Development (Planned)

- [ ] Baseline model creation
- [ ] Advanced model training (Random Forest, XGBoost)
- [ ] Hyperparameter tuning
- [ ] Model evaluation and selection

### Phase 4: API Development (Planned)

- [ ] FastAPI REST endpoints
- [ ] Input validation
- [ ] Error handling

### Phase 5: AWS Deployment (Planned)

- [ ] SageMaker model deployment
- [ ] Cloud endpoint configuration
- [ ] Performance monitoring

### Phase 6: Frontend Development (Planned)

- [ ] Interactive California map
- [ ] Location search functionality
- [ ] Risk visualization dashboard

### Phase 7: MLOps (Planned)

- [ ] Docker containerization
- [ ] CI/CD pipeline setup
- [ ] Automated testing

### Phase 8: Documentation & Launch (Planned)

- [ ] Comprehensive documentation
- [ ] Demo video creation
- [ ] Public release

## 📈 Expected Results

**Target Model Performance:**

- Accuracy: > 85%
- Precision: > 70%
- Recall: > 80%
- ROC-AUC: > 0.85
- API Latency: < 500ms

## 🤝 Contributing

This is a personal passion project born from experiencing the January 2025 Hollywood Hills fire evacuations firsthand. Standing with my car packed, watching neighbors evacuate, uncertain if we'd lose our homes—that experience showed me the urgent need for better wildfire prediction tools. As a data scientist, I'm committed to using my skills to ensure other families never have to experience that same fear and uncertainty without warning. While currently in active development, I'm exploring ways to make this tool freely accessible to California residents, emergency responders, and community organizations who need it most.

Contributions, suggestions, and collaboration opportunities are welcome!

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 👤 Author

**Tara Tavafi**

- Email: <f.tavafi@gmail.com>
- LinkedIn: [linkedin.com/in/taratavafi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/taratavafi)
- GitHub: [@ftavafi](https://github.com/ftavafi)
- Location: Los Angeles, California

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- CAL FIRE for providing comprehensive fire history data
- NOAA for weather and climate data access
- NASA for satellite imagery and vegetation indices
- USGS for topography and terrain data
- The open-source community for excellent ML tools and frameworks

## 📞 Contact

For questions, collaborations, or opportunities, please reach out via:

- Email: <f.tavafi@gmail.com>
- LinkedIn: [https://www.linkedin.com/in/taratavafi](https://www.linkedin.com/in/taratavafi)

---

**⚠️ Disclaimer**: This project is for educational and research purposes. Wildfire risk predictions should not be used as the sole basis for emergency decisions. Always follow official guidance from CAL FIRE and local authorities.

---

*Last Updated: January 2025*
